# Google Data Analytics Capstone Bellabeats Fitness Tracking

## Bellabeat Fitness Tracking Case Study

### Project Overview

#### Background
Bellabeat is a company founded in 2013  that manufactures health-focused smart products for women. They have three products, Leaft, Time, and Spring that connect to the Bellabeat app that provide users with health data related to their activity, sleep, stress, menstrual cycle, and mindfulness habits. 

#### Key Stakeholders
- UrškaSršen:Bellabeat’s cofounder and Chief Creative Officer
- SandoMur:Mathematician and Bellabeat’s cofounder; key member of the Bellabeat executive team 
- Bellabeat marketing analytics team: A team of data analysts responsible for collecting, analyzing, and reporting data that helps guide Bellabeat’s marketing strategy.

#### Business Task
Analyze the Fitbit Fitness Tracker Data to determine trends with current customer’s usage of Bella beat products and provide recommendations to inform Bellabeat’s marketing strategy 

#### Deliverables
- A clear summary of the business task
- A description of all data sources used
- Documentation of any cleaning or manipulation of data
- A summary of analysis
- Supporting visualizations and key findings
- High-level content recommendations based on the analysis 	

### Data Sources 
#### Background
This dataset generated by respondents to a distributed survey via Amazon Mechanical Turk between 03.12.2016 - 05.12.2016. 
Thirty eligible Fitbit users consented to the submission of personal tracker data, including minute-level output for physical activity, heart rate, and sleep monitoring.
Public dataset hosted on Kaggle
#### Limitations
30 female users of Fitbit may not accurately represent general female population who amy use similar devices
Dataset is from 2016 and is not recent
#### Data Sources used in this Analysis
1. The primary dataset used for this analysis is the “dailyActivity_merged.csv” which contains information for the tracking data for distance and time 

2. “sleepDay_merged.csv” was used as well for further analysis. It contains the tracking data for time spent asleep and in bed. 

### Cleaning and Analysis
#### Data Cleaning - Excel
1.Converted date into SQL compatible format “yyyy-mm-dd”
2. Created Totaltime Time Tracked Column
3. Created Day of The Week Column
4. Checked for nulls and duplicates 
#### Data Analysis - [SQL Link to Sqlfile here](https://github.com/tonguyen50/Google-Data-Analyytics-Capstone-Bellabeats-Fitness-Tracking/blob/main/Bellabeat%20SQL.sql)


[Link to Tableau Dashboard here](https://public.tableau.com/views/BellabeatsTableauWorkbook/Dashboard1?:language=en-US&:sid=&:redirect=auth&:display_count=n&:origin=viz_share_link)


#### Average Steps Taken and Average Calories Burnt Daily
```sql
SELECT COUNT( DISTINCT ID) as TotalUsers,
AVG(Calories) as AverageCaloriesBurned,
AVG(TotalSteps) as AverageTotalSteps   
FROM bellabeat.dailyactivity;
```

On average, users logged 7367 steps per day and burned an average 2303 calories per day. According to the CDC, it is recommended to complete 8000 - 10000 steps per day to lower the risks of premature death ([CDC.gov](https://www.cdc.gov/physical-activity-basics/benefits/index.html#:~:text=Taking%20more%20steps%20a%20day,to%208%2C000%20steps%20per%20day.)). The users in our study do not meet this benchmark, however it seems that according to WebMD our users displayed calorie burnage matching moderative active women in their 20s ([WebMD](https://www.webmd.com/fitness-exercise/how-many-calories-do-i-burn-in-a-day)). This seems contradictory but may be explained this SQL statement and further research

```sql
-- Average Calories Daily in the month per user
SELECT ID,  AVG(Calories) as AverageCaloriesBurnedDaily
FROM bellabeat.dailyactivity
GROUP BY ID
ORDER BY AverageCaloriesBurnedDaily;
```

Our users range  in calories burned daily from 1483 to 3436 calories. There is a difference between the physical activity done between users. Also we do not know the age, calorie intake, lifestyle, and genetic predispositions of our users. All these factors play a role in determining recommended calories to burn in a day and show a gap in the data provided.  

#### Total Minutes Tracked By Day of the Week

```sql
DROP TABLE if EXISTS Weekday;
CREATE TEMPORARY TABLE Weekday
(
ID char(255),
ActivityDate date,
DayOfTheWeek char(255),
TotalMoreActiveMinutes numeric,
TotalLessActiveMinutes numeric,
TotalMinutesTracked numeric
)
;

INSERT INTO Weekday
SELECT ID, ActivityDate, dayname(ActivityDate) as DayOfTheWeek,
SUM(VeryActiveMinutes) + SUM(FairlyActiveMinutes) as TotalMoreActiveMinutes,
  SUM(LightlyActiveMinutes)+SUM(SedentaryMinutes) as TotalLessActiveMinutes,
SUM(VeryActiveMinutes) + SUM(FairlyActiveMinutes) + SUM(LightlyActiveMinutes)+SUM(SedentaryMinutes) as TotalMinutesTracked
FROM bellabeat.dailyactivity
GROUP BY ID, ActivityDate
-- ORDER BY ID, ActivityDate;
```

```sql
-- Total Minutes Tracked by Day

Select  DayOfTheWeek,
SUM(TotalMinutesTracked) as TotalMinutesTrackedByDays
From Weekday
GROUP BY DayOfTheWeek
ORDER BY TotalMinutesTrackedByDays ASC;
```

We found that users logged their time in the app the most in the middle of the week: Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. Users logged the most amount of minutes , 188,783 minutes, on Tuesday. Towards the weekend, there was a decrease in total minutes tracked with the lowest amount being 145,058 minutes on Sunday. It could be useful to explore this decrease in tracking over the weekend and find ways to encourage users to keep their total tracking time consistent.  

#### Activity Time in Minutes

We found that users spent 931,738 minutes in the Sedentary category which accounts for 81% of the time spent versus being Lightly Active, Fairly Active, and Very Active.   

#### Percent Time More Active vs Total Minutes Awake in Bed

We also found using the “sleepDay_merged.csv” data that there is a negative correlation between Average Percent Time spent in the Very and Fairly Active category and Average of Total Minutes spent Awake in Bed. We assume that time spent awake in bed is for when the users are creating downtime or are unable to sleep. In this case, users who have spent more time being active may be able to reduce this transitionary period and go to sleep earlier.  

### Recommendations 
#### Fill in Data Gaps ->  Creating Custom Plans for Bellabeat Users
We found that there were sometimes conflicting data (ie. calories burnt and steps taken vs health guidelines), but attribute that to a lack of specific data. There is an opportunity here to gather specific user data at the onboarding of Bellabeat’s products. With this data, Bellabeat could form specific workouts and provide recommendations based on comparisons to health guidelines based on the user’s age, body mass index, and lifestyle. This would make the products more personalized and add value to the products beyond tracking. 
#### Identifying Areas of Interest -> Notifications
Based on the minutes tracked within the week, we recommend Bellabeat look into either achieving consistent usage by users throughout the week or take advantage of peaks and valleys of product usage in the week. On the weekends when there is less time spent on exercise, Bellabeat may benefit from sending notifications to remind users to be more active. Alternatively, Bellabeat could send more promotional content and/or recommendations for users to improves their exercise during weekdays where there is more app usage.  
#### Translating the Knowledge -> Inform and Encourage Users
The data that has been gathered so far is informative and shows patterns in user behavior. For a health conscious user base, it would be useful to see the correlations and understand how the tracking done by Bellabeat products provides useful information. Bellabeat can increase user interaction and add value to its products by coupling the tracking with visuals that can help translate the data it has tracked. By seeing gaps in physical activity and how time spent being more active can benefit other areas of life, we hope users will be encouraged to use more Bellabeat products and be more engaged.    
